This video is brought to you by Squarespace.
Whether you need a domain websites or an online store, make it with Squarespace.
Check out squarespace.com for a free trial link below.
I consider Bunco steering more honorable than the life led by the average
politician. These were the words of Jefferson soy Smith,
and he lived by them for almost his entire life.
His name probably isn't very familiar to you,
but soapy Smith might have been the most successful conman of the old west.
He United drifters and gunman into an organization and built a criminal empire
for himself no less than three times.
Whenever a city got too hot for him or the well of suckers began to run dry,
soapy would pack up and move to another place and start again from the ground
up.
Unsurprisingly,
a life such as this during those wild frontier days was rife with adventure,
mayhem, and violence to contend with numerous attempts on his life.
He interacted with other popular figures of Western law,
such as bat Masterson and Sam bass. He once barricaded himself inside city hall,
armed with dynamite and fought to a standoff against state militia.
And of course he died guns blazing. So yes,
all the ingredients are there for the thrill tale of soapy Smith.
The man who became known as the king of the frontier conman.
He was born Jefferson Randolph Smith. The second, sometime in late 18,
16 near the town of Newan in co county, Georgia.
He actually came from a wealthy family that had quite a bit of influence in the
area.
Smith's grandfather used to be a state legislator and owned a big plantation
while his father was an attorney.
Most of these riches went away while Jeff was still just a toddler though.
When the Americans of a war ravaged the area,
the family struggled to get things to how they were before.
So instead in the mid 1870s,
the they packed up and moved to start a new in round rock, Texas,
even before he embarked on his life. As a grifter Smith,
unwitingly became part of wild west history.
When he witnessed a shootout between Texas Rangers and the notorious outlaw Sam
bass on July, the 19 18 78 bass in his gang,
came around rock into approached by a deputy who them to disarm.
They refused and instead shot the deputy dead.
This prompted a gun fight with Texas Rangers who were also visiting the city
Smith and his cousin Edwin be owners BBO had a front row view for the
proceedings allegedly after one of the Rangers hit bass,
as he was trying to flee Smith, even shouted out. I think you got him.
Sam bass was captured. They to that day, he died of his injuries.
Two days later and was buried in a local cemetery. Smith had a lot of brothers.
Some of them became attorneys like their father. Others became doctors.
One became a farmer and another became a minister. Jeff, however,
seemed destined to turn into the black sheep of the family. As a teenager,
he discovered that people found his demeanor trustworthy and that he could use
this to his advantage. According to one version of the story,
Smith did try honest work for a while. As a cowboy, he might have even studied,
become minister like his older brother,
but all of this changed one day when he encountered a conman,
the swindler took Smith for half of his month salary.
Once he discovered he'd been suckered Smith, wasn't angry though.
He didn't even try to get his money back. Instead.
It was like a whole new world of possibilities had just opened up him like most
trickster.
He started out small the same years that BA Gott shot Smith left the family
home to make his own way. First he moved arounds between country fairs, mining,
a cattle towns and pedal cheap trinkets and fake jewelry.
He also began picking up on classic scams,
like three card Monsi and FLER rig better known today as the shell game,
it was called thimble rig because back in those days,
it was still common to use three th thimbles and pee for corn afterwards using
three Walnut shells game standard practice, hence the name shell game.
But nowadays you are more likely to see swindler employ a ball in three cups.
The materials might have changed, but the con remains the same.
The players or marks to use the correct terminology have to watch closely as the
operator shuffles three containers around.
And then they place a wager on the containers that they think hold of the ball.
It is made to look like a gambling game, perhaps even a game of skill.
But in reality,
the operator uses slight of hands to place the ball wherever they want and avoid
paying out. Obviously,
this was even easier back in the old days when they still used a small P if the
conman had an accomplice,
they might pose as a player and actually win a game to show others that it's and
entice them to try their luck. This person is known as a shell.
Soon enough Smith found his trademark scam known as the price soap bracket.
It would even garner him the nickname soapy,
which stuck around for the rest of his life.
Even though he went on to age and far more ambitious swindles allegedly the
Monica came from a police officer who arrested Smith for his price soap bracket,
unable to remember the swindlers name. He just wrote down soapy.
There is no solid evidence to suggest this ever happens,
but I suppose it says good origin story is Annie.
So here's how the trick worked.
Smith presents in himself as a humble soap salesman,
who in order to boost his sales had hidden several bills of various nominations
inside the rappers of some of his products.
Anyone who bought a soap from him had a chance to win their money. 10 20,
sometimes even 50 times over if they were lucky enough to win the big prize,
which was usually a 50 or $100 bill soapy first started using this scam in,
in Leadville, Colorado.
Initially the bars of soap were cheap somewhere around $1, however,
as the supplied dwindled and many bars of soap with prizes and sideway yet to be
claimed the price increased. Eventually,
if there were only a few bars left and nobody won the big prize,
yet those soaps would be auctioned off and go to the highest bidders.
More importantly, they had to win them in loud,
overt ways in front of everyone to show other people that the giveaways were
legit and encourage them to try their luck. Of course,
the swindle would not be very profitable if soy actually awarded hundreds of
dollars in prizes every day. So obviously the big winners were his shells,
Smith used slight of hand and other tricks to ensure that the soap buzz with the
large bells ended up in the hands of his accomplices.
As far as the rappers with the smaller denominations were concerned,
those probably did end up with a few lucky buyers. It worked in soap.
Piece's favor to give those to real customers. For two reasons,
it helped spread word of his content stunned.
It meant that he required fewer shells to keep the scam going.
The soap brackets helped Smith Reagan, a tiny profits,
but he had his site set a bit higher and soon enough,
he left Leadville for Denver.
And if you wanna set your sites higher with your business, well,
you should absolutely check out and use Squarespace to make your website.
Squarespace allows you to create a beautiful online identity,
whether you want a website for a business, and yes,
you can absolutely sell things online using Squarespace,
or maybe just a website for you personally.
It all starts on Squarespace with a beautiful template that come with cool names
like pursuit and Royce,
but you can also start from scratch if you prefer or just move over from an
existing domain, everything is super easy to manage you with Squarespace. Now,
once you've gone through the easy customization process, there's no updates.
There's no patches, there's no tech stuff to deal with,
but just in case you do run into any trouble and you probably won't Squarespace
has 24 7 support to help you out. Whenever you've got a question,
but like I said, at the beginning, Squarespace,
isn't just about a beautiful place to show off online.
It can also be a place to sell things. So look,
if you are looking to start a business, pursue a dream stuff like that,
do it with Squarespace, head squarespace.com for a free trial.
And when you're ready to launch go to squarespace.com/biographics to save
10% off your first purchase of a website or a domain
In 1879, Sophie headed for the big leagues of Denver,
the first of three cities where he would build his thriving criminal enterprise
from the ground up. Denver proved to be a Haven for people like him.
It not only had a relaxed attitude towards gambling,
but it was a city in the midst of a population. Boom,
there were always fresh new targets coming off the train,
just waiting to lose all their money.
At first Smith stuck to the soap bracket and other small time cons that he was
familiar with.
But with time he started branching out into a more executive role.
He began uniting all the swindlers con card sharks and other men of dubious
reputation. <affirmative> into a more cohesive organization with him. Of course,
at the top in just a few years,
soy Smith had formed a criminal empire and became the king of Denvers
underworld.
We should take a minute here to mention that Smith did not really fit the
stereotype that we have of the typical conman who is smooth, charming,
nonviolent, and prefers flight over fight.
Whenever there is a need for a quick getaway soy, he wasn't like that.
He was a violence man whose demeanor and behavior were more Akins that of a
gangster. Especially once he started gaining some real power,
he was a mean drunk and he became quite known and feared for his bad
temper.
He had a lot of other Savage men in his employee who weren't there to run cons
on people, but to make sure that his gang had the other hands,
if things escalated to violence, these situations occurred rather frequently,
not only when angry mark wanted revenge after realizing that they had been
swindled, but also when other crooks tried to muscle Lynn on soys territory,
outwardly Smith liked to portray himself as a man of the community.
Similar to mob bosses, like Al Capone, who would follow in his footsteps,
heated generously to charities and churches got involved in community projects,
closed his saloons on Sundays and helped people in neat at the height of his
power in Denver, soy had around a hundred men in his employ. More importantly,
he had the police and politicians in his pocket.
Most patrolling cops were paid off and left.
Soap's men alone to operate with impunity.
The ones who weren't crooked knew that there was nothing they could do.
Even if they arrested the con men, they would soon be released.
Thanks to a combination of witnesses, attorneys,
and politicians who were standing by and ready to assist.
Inevitably soapy wanted to expand his criminal empire regardless of how many
many he had under him. There was a limit how much money he could make.
If all they did was small time.
Cons Smith opened several saloons and gambling halls.
The most famous of which was the Oli club in 1888, according to popular legends,
the bar had a sign above the entrance to the gambling parlor,
which fittingly San caveat
ware soapy also opens fake lottery officers and stock exchanges.
If one of them was being exposed as fraudulent,
he would simply close up shop and reopen it in another place.
His younger brother, Bascom Smith joined his operation and ran a cigars store,
which was a front for various swindles that took place in the back room.
It was also at this time that soapy Smith began rubbing elbows with some of the
other famed figures of the old west.
One of them was Texas Jack Vermillion gun fighter,
who was best known for participating in the notorious, uh,
vendetta ride when right up and his associates took revenge against the men who
attacked his brothers. Incidentally,
if you'd like to know more about this renowned episode of Western law,
you can learn all about it. In our episode on WT up,
it would seem that around 1888,
famil made his way to Denver and joined up with soap's gang. The following year,
they were involved in a shootout in Pello,
Idaho against arrival Bunco gang that tried to kill Smith,
a famil drifted away to other parts.
Soon after another world west icon who made Smith's acquaintance was bat
Masterson. He was a car dealer in Denver for a while,
and worked in soapy saloons.
The two of them established a relationship that continued even after Smith
decided that it was time to leave Denver.
That moment didn't happen for quite a while though, by nature,
a con man lives the life of a drifter and does not spend a lot of time in the
same city, thanks to his powerful criminal empire in his connections. However,
Smith spent over a decade in Denver.
He even got married at one point to a woman named Mary noon and had kids.
He was actually pretty successful in keeping his two worlds of parties.
He told his wife to never ask him about his business.
While most of his associates said no idea that he was even married Smith.
Didn't manage it completely though. At one point,
the Rocky mans in news published an article talking about his family,
which finally made his worlds collide. He was so angry about this,
that he attacked the newspaper editor with his cane so badly that he should,
the man's skull was arrested and charged with attempted murder.
And even though he got off the media started focusing more and more on his
criminal empire.
He looked in shadows as black as his soul was a memorable line
news to describe Smith newspapers often made mention of his close ties to
Denver's mayor London, S police chief Farley by Dively naming the trio,
the firm of Londoner, Farley and Smith.
Eventually the mayor and the police chief lost their jobs in new city.
Officials began enacting anti-gambling reforms. A good con man.
He knows when to cut Baan run and Smith did just that relocating to the mining
boom town of creed, Colorado.
As soon as soy arrived in creed in 1892,
he enacted his plan to take over the town was small, but growing by the minute,
therefore so's main concern was to obtain as many properties as possible on
Creed's main street. Allegedly,
he did this by bringing in Denver prostitutes who used their charms to persuade
other men to sign and over their leases.
An interesting episode was the addition of William Sidney light,
better known as cap to Sophie's gang cap was a lawman who seemingly had an
exemplary record in law enforcement. He was also Smith's brother in law.
After Sophie became the new boss in town.
He convinced cap to take over as the deputy Marshall.
We're not exactly sure what the arrangement will was.
Did cap actually think he was going to clean up creed?
Did he realize that he was only there to serve as muscle for his brother-in-law?
We just don't know, but either way the gig didn't last long,
just a few months after taking the position of Marshall cap confronted a drunk
car dealer named William McCann who was shooting his gun in the street
predictably, a gun fight, ensued and cap killed McCann.
Even though the coroner jury concluded that it was justified cap quit.
Soon after cap's final demise came a year later in a very bizarre way.
During a court hearing a man named Coggins,
pulled out a revolver and shot him in the head twice.
His injuries were very bad,
but cap actually survived later that year cap was riding a train alone and he
accidentally discharged his gun in his pocket. The bullets hit him in the leg,
severed his femoral artery and cap bled to death in a matter of minutes.
So back to Smith, he wasted no time in gaining control of creed.
His main competition was a saloon called Ford's exchange operated by Robert
Ford. The notorious outlaw who killed Jesse James,
the timing worked out great for soy though was Ford himself was assassinated on
June the eighth, 1892 by Edward K Parto Kelly,
thus making it a lot easier for Smith to establish his own presence in town.
Many have alleged that soy was ultimately by behind Ford's death,
as he convinced Oak Kelly to do the deed.
But there's no evidence ATEST to that idea. Not before long,
all saloons in town paid tribute to Smith,
all except won the Denver exchange.
The reason this establishment escaped soap's grasp was because it was managed by
bat Masterson. We don't know if it was because of friendship, respect, or fear,
but Smith never tried to mess with masters and saloon and even gambled there on
occasion during his time in creed Smith enacted all of his usual scams and
frauds, but there was also a new one,
which was strange enough that it merits mention.
So he got his hands on a petrified man. He named it McGinty hens,
put it on display in an exhibition.
It only costs people 10 cents to see the oddity,
but while they were waiting in line,
there were shell and card games available to help them pass the time and spend
some money. Two, three,
Meanwhile in Denver city officials realized that cleaning up the town had
actually been terrible for business. They wanted Smith and,
and all of his associates back.
And fortunately for all involved the time he worked out great.
After a growth spurt,
the boom town of creed had lost its boom ands was now just a regular town.
Not to mention that a great fire destroyed many buildings,
including soys main headquarters Smith.
He was looking to relocate again with minimal effort. Soy was back running scam,
AMS and grats in Denver. The good times didn't last long though.
While city officials were happy that Smith was back to his old ways.
The new Colorado governor David Hansen wait, was not.
He was elected on an anti-corruption platform and proceeded to fire the top
Denver officials that he considered responsible for corruption in the city,
in response,
the officials and many of their associates barricaded themselves inside Denver
city hall.
They called on Smith for assistance and even made him deputy sheriff intern.
He joined them inside the hall and brought his men who are armed with rifles and
dynamite. Consequently,
the governor brought in the state militia in an event commemorated in the media
as the Denver city hall war. It may have been called a,
but if anyone actually opens fire, it would've been a massacre, not a wall.
The men inside the building might have been armed with rifles,
but the militia had cannons and Gatling guns. So be, and his men,
they would've been slotted. Fortunately for them cooler heads prevailed.
And the governor decided to withdraw the militia.
The courts eventually sided with him and the Denver officials.
They stayed had fired with his political protection. Gone.
Soy lost a lot of territory to his competition.
Mainly a gang run by the brothers in 1895,
soy and BA got in trouble after beating up a saloon owner.
His brother was put in jail for attempted murder while soy was forced to flee to
Denver
With no other choice, Smith relocated again,
after drifting unsuccessfully from place to place for a few years,
he settled on ska way.
Alaska looking to take advantage of the Kloni gold rush Smith operated in the
same way.
As before he used the resources at his disposal to gather allies for his
eventual takeover. He put the town Marshall on his payroll.
He hired henchman who started running various cons, such as fixed card games.
He even added a fake Telegraph office to his repertoire.
Clients would pay the fees,
but they never noticed that the wires went inside the wall that didn't come out
on the other side and of the course while they were waiting for a reply,
there were more than a few friendly characters around who enticed them to play a
few games to pass the time soy opened a saloon called Jeff Smith's par,
which functioned as his base operations. According to a description,
it looked innocent enough. It had a main bar and a restaurant. And in the back,
there was a parlor as pretty and as a lady's OI where Marx
would lose all their money outside. There was a small M empty yard,
which had a secret exit. So soapy men could make a quick getaway.
If they got made, the saloon still stands today and operates as a museum.
Not everyone welcomes soapy with open arms,
even though he continued his tradition of making generous donations to portray
himself as a pillar of the community,
a vigilance committee known as the committee of 1 0 1,
wanted to throw him out of town in reply.
So he formed his own law and order committee of three 17 to ensure that justice
would be dealt out to its full extent.
It's unclear if Smith actually had 317 men under his commands,
but based on later arrest,
it's highly unlikely that his gang numbered more than a few dozen Smith lasted
less than a year in sag way before his bad temper finally became the end of him.
A minor called John Stewarts was causing a ruckus in town about losing his gold
in one of soapy scams, nothing outta the ordinary so far,
but Stewart was being far more vocal than your average mark.
He had the support of the committee of 1 0 1 on July, the 8, 18 98.
The committee held a meeting on Juno Wharf that Smith decided to crash.
He left his men behind concluding that his Winchester rifle was all the
persuasion he needed to get an invite. Turns out he was wrong.
The committee placed four guards at the entry to the Wharf.
One of them named Frank Reed blocked Sophie's entrance Smith tried to hit him
with a part of his rifle,
but caught it with one hand and pulled out his revolver with the other.
He shot the grifter. He had time to shoot him back before collapsing.
Some say another guard named Jesse Murphy fired the fatal shot either way.
Soapy Smith died on the spot while Reed succumb to his wounds.
12 days later with soapy dead, his gang wasn't so scary anymore.
The towns spoke BN rounding up all of the swindler and it was only the timely
arrival of the us army infantry that saved some of them from being lynched.
The prominent members of the gang were put in prison while the rest were thrown
out of town. So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up bottom below, and don't forget to subscribe.
We've got brand new videos, just like this a few times a week.
So subscribe hit that notification bell.
You'll find out about all of those and as always, thank you for watching.